# Flow of Math PhD's (Part 3)

I have been looking at flow of PhD's ([here][1] and [here][2]) last
two days.  The resulting graphs are highly connected, and therefore,
difficult to read. In order to perform more flexible analyses and to
simplify the workflow, I created another [dataset][4] which is easier
to process, and I simplified the [code][3] that generates these
graphs.

[1]: flow-of-math-phds-1.html 
[2]: flow-of-math-phds-2.html
[3]: flow-of-phds-3-code.txt
[4]: all-named-edges.csv.bz2

The dataset now consists of person id, advisor's school (name, country and
id) and recipient's school (name, country and id) and year of the degree.
The code I wrote is bare bones. Depending on what you want, first you need
to filter the data and then pipe it to the program.  The command line parameters
are

1. The first item is either 0 for school based graphs or 1 for country based
graphs.

2. The threshold is a number. Since the graphs are highly connected, depending
on the number of PhD's granted between vertices, I put a weight (explained below.)  
If the weight is below this threshold, it is not displayed on the final graph.

3. The title of the graph for information purposed delimited with quotation
marks.

The weight function: first all PhD's are counted for the filtered dataset.  Then 
these numbers are normalized between 0 and 1.  Then I apply the following function: 
$w(x) = \log(1+x)$ to the result up to a suitable scalar multiple and a cut off 
function.

## Country Based Graphs

Let us start looking at the graphs again:

### [Math PhD Landscape Before 1800](flow-of-phds-3-before-1800.png)

France, The Netherlands and Germany (then Prussia) dominated the Math PhD's.

### [Math PhD Landscape Between 1800 and 1910](flow-of-phds-3-1800-1910.png)

The network has expanded, but the connections are not as strong as
before.  Germany still dominates, and we have new players appearing on
the scene such as Russia and Ukraine.  Also notice that both US and UK
are importers of PhD degrees, and Germany is the main exporter.  But
this might be an inherent bias of the dataset. Afterall, Math
Genealogy Project is based in the US.


### [Math PhD Landscape Between 1910 and 1940](flow-of-phds-3-1910-1940.png)

The number of PhD's among Germany, The Netherlands, Austria and
Switzerland expands.  Russia starts exporting degrees to US.  Also,
notice the relationship between Germany and Spain, but we see no
discernible relations between Germany and Italy in betwen two World
Wars.

### [Math PhD Landscape Between 1940 and 1985](flow-of-phds-3-1940-1985.png)

Wow! Almost all PhD's between 1940's and 1980's are given in the US.
The US looks like this large sink that swallows all the math PhD's.
Also, notice that Russia's influence expands.  India now is visible,
but not China. See [what
happens](flow-of-phds-3-1940-1985-us-removed.png) when we remove the
US from the network.

### [Math PhD Landscape Between 1985 and 2005](flow-of-phds-3-1985-2005.png)

The US becomes the primary exporter of Math PhD's. China shows up for
the first time. And [see what
happens](flow-of-phds-3-1985-2005-us-removed.png) if we remove the US
from the network.  In the original graph, it looked as if the number
of Math PhD's Russia produced diminished, but this is not the case.
The relative number of US PhD's is so large that Russian network was
invisible.

### [Math PhD Landscape After 2005](flow-of-phds-3-after-2005.png)

The US now dominating the scene. China appears on the horizon, and
when [we removed](flow-of-phds-3-after-2005-us-germany-removed.png) we see the
other networks more clearly, such as the networks around Russia, and
the UK, France and Spain.

## School Based Graphs

I will be looking at the specific network around the US, the UK and Canada.  

### [Anglo-American Network Between 1800-1910](flow-of-phds-3-anglo-1800-1910.png)

The Math PhD Network of the US is very small and largely depends on
the UK and Germany.

### [Anglo-American Network Between 1910-1940](flow-of-phds-3-anglo-1910-1940.png)

The network starts taking shape. The major hubs form: Chicago,
Harvard, Urbana-Champaign, Johns Hopkins and Princeton.

### [Anglo-American Network Between 1940-1985](flow-of-phds-3-anglo-1940-1985.png)

US becomes the major importer of PhD degrees in math after the 2nd
World War. The major hubs form a tight network with some interesting
subnetworks on the periphery: Texas Austin and small cluster of
Southern Universities (not visible on this scale), New York University
and its small network, Cambridge and its cross-continental subnetwork.

### [Anglo-American Network Between 1985-2005](flow-of-phds-3-anglo-1985-2005.png)

I don't know what it is but the PhD network became even more connected
than previous decades. Increasing and decreasing the threshold does
not much change the structure of the graph.  It is a highly connected
graph with plenty of connections between the major hubs and the rest
of the universities.


### [Anglo-American Network After 2005](flow-of-phds-3-anglo-after-2005.png)

The graph didn't change much from the previous era.  If we look at the
graph after the major hubs (Berkeley, Stanford, Princeton, Harvard and
MIT) are [removed](flow-of-phds-3-anglo-after-2005-removed.png), we
see the secondary networks more clearly. See the UK network, UIUC,
Columbia, Washington, and Purdue for example.
